Saving Private Ryan Ptsd and the Emotional Toll of War

Saving Private Ryan (Spielberg et al. 1998) may come off as a war movie focused only on fighting and explosions. Praised for its realistic portrayal of war and the gruesomeness with which the movie proceeds, it’s easy to see why war-movie fanatics would love this movie. However, beneath its gruesomeness and horrific practical effects, the movie subtly delves into the effects of war on veterans, specifically that of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).

Through the eyes of our main character, Captain John Miller (Tom Hanks), we follow the journey of seven men in World War 2. These men, tasked with the job of bringing back Private Ryan, a man whose three brothers died in the war, go through a series of challenges as they attempt to sneak through enemy lines to find Ryan. Dealing with loss and constant warfare along the way, our main characters experience the true brutality of war while continuing along their pursuits in the cold terrain of World War 2 Germany.


PTSD

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is a Trauma and stressor-related disorder, as classified by the DSM-5, which is triggered by a traumatic event(s) (the stressor). This traumatic event(s) is a recurring disruptive thought in the victim's brain, often prompting symptoms such as flashbacks and other physiological reactions that often occur as a response to fear of events such as the traumatic event recurring. Furthermore, people with PTSD experience negative alterations in cognition and changes in their arousal and reactivity, such as failing to remember aspects of the traumatic event or disruption in sleep patterns, respectively.


PTSD, however, is a relatively common mental disorder, as around 6.8% of the United States population experiences PTSD in some form throughout their lifetime (Kessler, Berglund, Demler, et al. 2005). This number is higher in the military, however, as a larger proportion of military personnel experience traumatic events. For example, studies have estimated that for veterans deployed to Iraq, the rate of PTSD prevalence is 12.9% (Hines et al. 2014). The same study also found that the rates of PTSD for veterans deployed to Afghanistan were 7.1%. Although the high rate of PTSD amongst veterans is alarming, PTSD has barely been discussed throughout history, often not being taken seriously or glossed over. 

It wasn’t until 1980 that the phrase “Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder” was even acknowledged as a valid mental disorder. Prior to that, terms such as “combat fatigue” (which by the way was also noted down as the single largest loss of manpower during World War 2) were used to describe the illness. Yet, even after its official adoption and recognition as a mental disorder, not much was known about the illness. Similar to many other mental disorders at the time, PTSD was heavily stigmatized. It was a taboo topic that never truly got any public attention or found its way into the mass media, all while continuing to affect a large portion of the United States population. 

Saving Private Ryan’s Portrayal of PTSD

The portrayal of PTSD in Saving Private Ryan occurs mainly through the film's protagonist, Captain John Miller. Miller, a seasoned war veteran who is the leader of the mission to rescue Private Ryan, has a left hand that constantly shakes. The shaking of his hands is constantly brought to light throughout the film, as even his crew members take notice of it, unsure of what to make of it. Furthermore, during the final battle, we see Miller freeze amongst the chaos as the film slowly moves into a slow-shutter effect that mirrors what Miller sees. 

The freezing when encountering scenarios similar to a traumatic event and constant shaking of hands are both frequent symptoms of PTSD. While subtle, it is clear that Spielberg, who suffers from PTSD himself, wanted to capture the plight of those with the disorder. Miller is by all means a knowledgeable captain. He is well-versed in strategies and has the necessary experience to carry out a mission as difficult as this, yet he still freezes in crucial moments due to the symptoms of PTSD triggering. Through Millers inability to function, Speilberg highlights that even the most experienced of war veterans can be affected by PTSD, causing them great difficulties out in the battle filed. 





How Saving Private Ryan Created Awareness


Saving Private Ryan, released in 1998, was one of the first movies to create conversation about PTSD and its effects. The movies' notoriously gruesome depictions of war, especially in their 17-minute beginning sequence portraying the D-Day invasion, showed just how horrifying war is. These scenes were so brutal that veterans around the country had to walk out of the movie as their PTSD was often triggered. This occurrence, which was incredibly rare, sparked national interest. News sources across the country began to follow these reports, bringing attention to the “bizarre” action of veterans (as people thought at the time).

However, as more and more news outlets began covering these occurrences, it became clear that there was an underlying issue that caused veterans across the country to leave their seats in horror. Thus, PTSD began to be less stigmatized as open conversations about the disorder finally began to take place. The plight of veterans after war began to be more and more understood as the movie continued to skyrocket into box office success. 





Conclusion

While the movie is quite often critiqued for its over-the-top violence, it’s important to understand that it is this very violence that made the true horror of war understandable to a larger audience. The gruesomeness and bloody nature of the film make it easier for normal people to understand why war can be so traumatizing and why PTSD is so common amongst war veterans. If Spielberg was trying to bring more awareness about PTSD through this movie, his mission was a success. 

Especially since so many activities we regularly partake in, like fireworks or watching war movies (like Saving Private Ryan), can be so triggering to veterans, it is important to be careful around those you know may have PTSD. PTSD is still extremely prevalent today and it’s important we take the steps to bring more awareness to the mental illness.But what do you think? Have you or anyone you know been affected by PTSD? Let us know in the comments below and we’ll see you in our next blog!















Sources:

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15939837/

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25569079/




