
The Yellow Wallpaper, PPD and its historic treatment 

You are stuck in a dark room, with a singular window peering out into the beautiful world below you, a world you are forbidden from exploring. It is this very situation that our main character finds herself in as we begin the story of The Yellow Wallpaper (1892). 

“The Yellow Wallpaper”, by Charlotte Perkins Gilman, is a story told in first-person narration that follows a woman who becomes unwell after giving birth and is confined to her room until she improves. The story, told through the woman's journal entries, begins with her and her husband, John, a renowned physician, moving into a new house in the countryside. Accompanying them is their newborn baby, and Jennie, John’s sister, who will take care of the baby while the woman is sick. We are then first introduced to the room in which the woman is forced to stay. 

A rusty Victorian-style attic with a singular bed and, by far, its most defining aspect: an ugly yellow wallpaper that runs throughout the room. From the very beginning, we are able to tell that the woman hates the wallpaper, the room she is forced to stay in, and the fact that her husband leaves for work most of the day. Furthermore, her husband, John, forbids her from doing many activities she enjoys, such as writing. Instead, he reemphasizes her weakness and states that bed rest is the only thing that can heal her.

As the story continues, the viewer can see the slow deterioration in the narrator’s mental well-being. What starts off as an innocent desire to go outside eventually becomes an unhealthy obsession with the yellow wallpaper. From following its design to staring at it throughout the day, the author slowly loses herself completely, eventually hallucinating a woman trapped within the wallpaper. Bit by bit, she begins tearing at the wallpaper, chewing and scratching the wall to free the woman, and by the end of the story, our narrator has lost all sense of self and has come to believe that she, herself, is the woman trapped within the wallpaper.

PostPartum Depression and Postpartum psychosis (PPP)

Postpartum Depression (PPD) is a mental disorder affecting roughly one in eight women following childbirth, characterized by persistent sadness, anxiety, and feelings of detachment from the baby. Categorized as a major depressive episode by the DSM-5, PPD is a more severe form of baby blues. Baby blues is the official title for the common sadness mothers feel after childbirth, characterized by two weeks of immense sadness and depression which usally ameliorates by the third week.  While both baby blues and PPD have similar symptoms, especially those of depression and other mood disorders, baby blues is often resolved within a few weeks, whereas PPD is more long-lasting and can have severe impacts if left untreated. 

Due to the necessity of physical and emotional attachment between a mother and her baby for proper growth in infancy, PPD poses a severe risk not only to the mother, but also to the baby and its development. Furthermore, PPD can lead to a strain between the mother and her partner as well. 

The exact causes of PPD are still unknown, but most theories have pointed to the sudden drop of estrogen and progesterone combined with the stress of caring for the baby, which leads to the onset of the disorder. A meta-analysis found that the risks of experiencing PPD are increased if the baby is a boy, the mother has a history of depression or if epidural anesthesia was used. 

While more work is being done today to destigmatize the disorder, most cases of PPD still go untreated due to the stigma that has historically been associated with the disorder. Women with PPD historically have been labelled as “bad mothers” and in some cases, have even lost custody of their children solely due to the disorder. Thus, lots of women are afraid to seek help, meaning that the actual prevalence of PPD is probably much larger than what we know. 

Postpartum psychosis (PPP), on the other hand, is a rarer postpartum disorder characterized by the sudden onset of hallucinations and delusions in a mother following childbirth. PPP, while only affecting around 0.1% of new mothers, is a very serious condition that, if left untreated, can cause severe harm to the baby and the mother. For example, women with PPP have the highest postpartum suicide rate at approximately 5%, as well as the highest infanticide rate at 4%. 

Although PPP is extremely serious, it isn’t officially categorized within the DSM-5, meaning diagnosing and testing PPP is incredibly difficult. Official recognition of PPP is crucial to enhancing future treatment and ensuring that women with PPP can recover as quickly as possible. 

In The Yellow Wallpaper, our main character likely suffers from both PPD and PPP. Her frequent sadness and suicidal thoughts are most likely symptoms of PPD, and the appearance of a woman trapped within the wallpaper is almost confirmed to be a symptom of PPP. We can also see how women with postpartum mental health issues were historically not trusted around their babies, as our narrator is barred from being with her baby, who is receiving care from John’s sister. This, while a common response to PPD, can also easily worsen cases of the disorder, which is evident through our narrator's slow deterioration. Furthermore, her husband's controlling behavior and long absences are stressors that only worsened our narrator's mental wellbeing, highlighting the importance of environmental effects in the onset of mental disorders. 

The narrator's story highlights the effects of untreated PPD and PPP on a mother's wellbeing. From feelings of inadequacy to contemplating suicide and eventually becoming so infatuated with a wallpaper that she loses herself, her story is a warning against the effects of postpartum disorders when they are left unchecked. 

The Historical Treatment of PPD and the Yellow Wallpaper

Historically, women with PPD were subject to mistreatment, and often, doctors and practitioners would practice a policy of house arrest that would exacerbate symptoms rather than make them better. In fact, ‘The Yellow Wallpaper’ is based on Gilman’s own experience with Dr. Silas Weir Mitchall, the leading expert on PPD at the time. Under Mitchell, Gilman was assigned to a treatment known as a strict “rest cure,” which involved bed rest with no physical activities, drawing, reading, or writing. At the time, this was seen as the gold standard for PPD treatments, with most top-level male physicians advocating for a treatment plan of strict bed rest. However, women psychologists such as Mary Putnam Jacobi were some of the few to advocate for treatment plans that involved physical activities and stimulation, which were much more successful. 

Gilman began to work on her short story following almost 3 months of living under the rest cure treatment plan, which, for obvious reasons, was not effective. “The Yellow Wallpaper”, although exaggerated, highlights how the treatment of PPD in the 19th century was incredibly ineffective, and if anything, even more harmful to the mental well-being of women.  , did the term “baby blues” officially become recognized, and only in the 1980s and 90s did the distinction between PPD and baby blues become clearer. Recent developments in medication, such as the creation of antidepressants and a better understanding of the causes of PPD, have led the way for modern treatment plans.
	PPD is just one example of a larger issue in psychology: a lack of representation for women. While we are focusing on ameliorating this situation today, years of suffering have highlighted the need for us to improve our treatment plans rapidly. Furthermore, the stigma that surrounds PPD to this day needs to be broken down to allow for better treatment and a healthier life for the mom and the baby. But what do you think? Have you ever heard of postpartum depression or postpartum psychosis? Let us know, and we can’t wait to see you next time!




Sources: 

https://opmed.doximity.com/articles/postpartum-psychosis-and-the-diagnostic-and-statistical-manual-of-mental-disorders
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/24152-postpartum-psychosis
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postpartum_depression#History



