Anxiety Portrayed in The Scream – Painting By Edvard Munch
A girl on her way to home stops by a local art gallery. She lingers on the walls full of paintings, stopping at the sight of a particular painting: a sloth sobbing underneath an apple tree. She feels an emotional sense of  being understood. The unusual visual of a sloth underneath a tree signifies her experience of not belonging in a place where she should have belonged—and the red apples on the tree speaking for her expectations of finding love Many of us feel emotionally connected to art, whether it be poetry, music, movies, tv shows or paintings. Paintings such as the Sloth underneath the apple tree speak to one’s mind. How? Your brain is wired to find meaning behind whatever it perceives, creating your own story around the art. You have mirror neurons which means you see emotions in art, and your brain reacts like you’re indulging  in it too. Your brain will connect visual expressions with relatable experiences, felt emotions and memories. This explains the concept of color psychology—as certain colors affect mood. Black may represent isolation, with dark shades personifying sorrow, while light ones may associate themselves with more calmer feelings.
“The Scream” by Edvard Munch is a painting that feels like a panic attack frozen in time. The painting depicts a long wooden bridge stretching diagonally across the lower half. Standing near the front of the bridge is a single ghostly figure with a skull face, eyes wide as the opened mouths that represent a screaming or gasping sensation. Their hands are clutched tightly to the sides of their face, their bodies thin and almost melting. The body appears to dissolve into its surroundings. In the background, two smaller human figures walk calmly along the bridge unaware of the central figure’s terror. The image is not calm, nor is it peaceful. The feeling of your world collapsing and no one tends to notice so you’re dissolving into the surroundings.
The painting expresses isolation in anxiety, as the figure is tense, fearful and alone in their emotion despite being surrounded by others. To capture the moment further, the artist uses color psychology in the environment of the painting. The sky above the figure is imagined as waves of sound and heat like a sunset that burns rather than glows, the landscape twists and wraps since reality is blending under pressure. The artist uses bold fiery colors from  red to yellow color palettes to convey the burning sensation of anxiety.The whole overview of the painting conveys sensory overload of anxiety in isolation of a person. A person’s anxiety and fear feels unnoticed hence the figure screams as it blends into its surroundings as people walk by not noticing the bridge falling and the sunset burning which some people also assume represents madness.
What do you think? Is the figure’s anxiety regarding the world collapsing goes unnoticed or is it just mad? Do you have your own theories? How does it make you feel? Your perspective is what signifies and finds meaning in art such as paintings.


