

Your Lie In April (2014) has received critical acclaim since its release, landing itself inside the top 100 anime on My Anime List, the world's largest anime ranking forum. Following the story of a traumatized pianist, Arima Kousei, and his journey to recovery while being pushed by an enthusiastic violinist, Kaori Miyazono, the anime has often been cited as one of the most heartbreaking anime out there. Yet, even though its massive popularity is undeniable, the anime has also received a plethora of criticism for its portrayal of mental health, abuse, and many other dark themes. Specifically, the light-heartedness in which these themes are discussed has been the subject of disapproval for hundreds of thousands of fans and critics around the world. However, is Your Lie in April’s portrayal of mental health really that bad? In this blog, we’ll deep dive into both the good and the bad, analyzing whether the dark topics that this show discusses are truly done justice or not. 



Your Lie in April Plot 

Your Lie in April follows the story of Kousei, an ex-pianist who quit, even though as a child, he was incredibly successful and well known. The show starts with our main character in high school. Kousei, at this time, has given up playing the piano altogether and sticks strictly to transcribing pieces. His best friends, Tsubuki Sawabe and Ryota Watari, are both into sports, and we see that from the beginning, their dynamic revolves around teasing Kousei. Eventually, the three main characters meet Kaori, a violinist who claims to have a crush on Ryota. While the four of them eventually become closer and closer, Kaori continually pushes Kousei to pick up the piano once more. 

Eventually, Kousei agrees to duet with Kaori and slowly but surely gets back into piano. However, as the show progresses, we see the real reason he quit piano was because of the trauma his mom imparted on him. As a child, Kousei was abused by his mother and forced into playing the piano. Following her death due to a chronic illness, Kousei altogether gave up the piano and began moving on until Kaori began to drag him back in. 



Midway through the show, however, it is revealed that Kaori has been diagnosed with a terminal illness and must undergo surgery with a low chance of survival. Finally, as the show comes to an end, it’s revealed that all along, Kaori had a crush on Kousei and only got close to the group to get him back into playing the piano. 



Your Lie In April and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. Cw: Abuse

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)  is a mental health disorder that results from experiencing a traumatic event. Common symptoms of it include frequent flashbacks to the event, persistent anxiety, and avoidance of any stimuli that may serve as a reminder to said traumatic event. In Kousei’s case, the traumatic event that he experienced was the constant abuse his mother put him through to ‘improve’ his piano skills. His constant avoidance of playing the piano, his persistent flashbacks to his mother's abuse whenever he steps up on stage, and the frequent visions and dreams of being back under his mother’s control are all symptoms that are commonly seen in people with PTSD, meaning that he almost certainly has some form of it. Furthermore, one of the most common themes throughout this show is his inability to hear the notes he plays, something that causes him to only hear the thump of the keys rather than the music itself. This causes him to mess up countless times in both practice and performances, making music competitions and duets with Kaori near impossible. This, too, is a symptom that stems from his past trauma, and as the show concludes, he regains the ability to hear notes that symbolize his recovery from his PTSD. 

Overall, the portrayal of PTSD in Your Lie In April is, for the most part, realistic. It captures symptoms that most people with the disorder face in the real world and manages to portray them in a way that makes us understand their true horror. From his frequent breakdowns to his visions and flashbacks, the show does a good job in its portrayal of PTSD. However, the main critique of the show is not in Kousei’s experience with the disorder, but rather with how he “got better”. 

Your Lie In April's Shortcomings

The main shortcoming of Your Lie In April is found through Kousei’s recovery process and his friend’s questionable “treatment” decisions. For one, Kaori, although unaware of Kousei’s trauma, decided that the solution to helping Kousei through his trauma would be to push him headfirst directly into confronting the source: playing the piano.

This is an approach that almost certainly would not work in the real world, as pushing someone to confront years of trauma all at once forcibly is bound to cause more harm than it is healing. In the real world, treating someone with PTSD often does involve exposure therapy- a slow process in which one is gradually forced to confront bits and pieces of trauma. Exposure therapy is meant to be tedious and slow to ensure that the patient is safe and comfortable in each step before proceeding to the next. 

Conversely, what Kaori did was to thrust Kousei all at once into playing the piano. While the show touches on how this solution may have backfired initially, it seems to adopt a “try it enough times and it’ll work” mentality. Towards the end of the show, it appears that Kousei has completely healed due to being pushed into playing the piano enough times, which, for obvious reasons, is a harmful portrayal of the healing process from PTSD. 

Another major shortcoming in this show is its refusal to acknowledge its darker themes for what they are. The biggest offender of this is Kousei’s mother’s abuse. The show, for one, never uses the word “abuse” to describe what his mother did to him, often choosing to dance around the subject instead. Then, towards the end of the show, the show goes as far as to attempt to justify her actions, claiming that it was “all out of love”. Furthermore, the show also never explicitly states that Kousei has PTSD. Although it is heavily implied, it feels as if the show tries to avoid its dark themes to maintain a light-hearted front. 

The “Lighthearted anime” front that Your Lie In April tries to maintain feels off, as the show is inherently quite dark. By trying to maintain this front, Your Lie in April loses much of the emotional impact it could’ve had if it had just focused on portraying these very serious topics in ways that highlighted their severity. This is by far the biggest critique of Your Lie in April, as the show, which tries to portray complex mental health topics, shouldn’t intentionally lessen their impact and make them seem less serious than they are. 

Your Lie In April’s Strengths

While Your Lie in April falls short in many ways, there are also things it excels at, specifically in its portrayal of the impact social connection has on mental well-being. Kaori, although she pushes Kousei headfirst into his trauma, slowly takes time to understand him and eventually, the two of them form a real bond that transcends the stage they share. Tsubuki and Ryota spending more and more time with Kousei towards the end of the show also shows the importance of connection, and the show takes time to build that connection in a way that feels natural. Kousei’s bonds with his friends strengthen over time, and as they do, so does his mental health. For all the harmful stereotypes Your Lie In April pushes, its portrayal of friendship and the importance of social connection is one of the areas where the show excels. 

Even though it is incredibly popular, it’s important to address the flaws Your Lie In April exhibits, especially when discussing its portrayal of mental health and the healing journey. The show has many overbearing flaws that make it difficult to recommend as an accurate portrayal of PTSD, yet its emphasis on social connection is important, as it highlights the true effect a strong social support system has on someone's well-being. Overall, what are your thoughts? Have you ever seen the show, and if you have, did you think that it was a good portrayal or not? 






















Sources

https://www.apa.org/ptsd-guideline/treatments/prolonged-exposure#:~:text=Prolonged%20Exposure%20Therapy?-,Prolonged%20exposure%20is%20a%20specific%20type%20of%20cognitive%20behavioral%20therapy,about%20what%20happens%20during%20therapy.



