At some point in life, nearly everyone has chased a dream. It could be the perfect moment, the perfect person or even the perfect future. Many chase happiness in this perfect reality they dream of. But, what if this happiness is just a trick that your brain is playing on you? Imagine chasing a dream with such determination that you lose sight of all else, only to realize that the happiness you expected to attain was simply a mirage. That’s the story of Jay Gatsby, a man who built his entire life on a fantasy: that chasing what’s past would make him happy. Baz Luhrmann’s 2013 film adaptation of “The Great Gatsby” introduces viewers to the mystique of Jay Gatsby (Leonardo DiCaprio), a wealthy and mysterious figure known for his lavish parties and elusive origins. His true motive, however, is not wealth or fame. It is his obsession with rekindling a relationship with Daisy Buchanan (Carey Mulligan), a former lover who now lives just across the bay. The story unfolds through the eyes of Nick Carraway (Tobey Maguire), a Yale graduate who moves to Long Island and becomes a neighbor of Gatsby. Throughout the story, Gatsby clings to the belief that recreating a perfect version of the past will bring him lasting happiness, an idea that portrays a common psychological trap: affective forecasting error.
To Gatsby, the faint glow of the green light from Daisy Buchanan’s dock wasn’t just a beacon across the bay—it was a symbol of hope, desire and belief that his dream would bring him happiness. We all have our green lights, but sometimes, the closer we get to our dreams, the further they drift from reality. “The Great Gatsby” is a story about affective forecasting error, our brain’s tendency to exaggerate how future events will make us feel. Let’s break down how this psychological trap plays out in “The Great Gatsby” and why it’s relevant today.
Affective forecasting error, mainly publicized by Timothy Wilson and Daniel Gilbert, is a psychological concept that describes people’s tendency to misjudge future emotions. Maybe you think that getting accepted into your dream school will make you happier than anything, or that breaking up with someone will leave you devastated forever.
Research shows that people almost always overestimate the intensity and duration of future emotions. When you try to predict how you’ll feel after a future event, your brain is conducting what is referred to as a mental simulation. This is the process of playing out scenarios in one’s mind in an attempt to experience events before they happen. This process involves several brain regions: the prefrontal cortex: responsible for planning and imagining the future. The limbic system: responsible for processing emotion, specifically the amygdala. The hippocampus: uses memories from past experiences to try and guess how future events might make you feel.
When the brain tries to simulate future emotions, it usually gets the picture wrong. This is mainly due to five factors:
Focalism
Events do not take place exactly like we imagined them. When we imagine specific events in our future, our brain focuses most on the most extravagant aspects of a situation and often omits small details that may hold significant importance. For example, you may think that getting your dream job will make you happy all the time, but you might not think about the possible long hours, rude coworkers, or unexpected challenges. Even our most vivid mental previews are built on incomplete information due to the unpredictability of the future. And when reality doesn’t align with our mental simulation, we often experience disappointment. When Gatsby imagined being reunited with Daisy, he pictured a magical, life-altering moment. But in reality, it was awkward and messy. He drastically overestimated how amazing the emotional payoff would be.
“There must have been moments even that afternoon when Daisy tumbled short of his dreams—not through her own fault, but because of the colossal vitality of his illusion.”
Gatsby’s fantasy had grown larger than life, becoming bigger than Daisy herself. His brain had created a future so joyful that no reality could match it.
Impact Bias
When imagining future emotions, we almost always overestimate the duration and intensity of an emotion or feeling. Gatsby believed that being with Daisy would grant him lasting happiness. But it didn’t occur to him that emotions fade and eventually, the fact that life keeps moving.
Availability Heuristic
When your brain tries to imagine a future event, it pulls memories from similar past experiences. The problem is, we don’t always remember the past accurately. This is because the past memories we rely on are often not the best ones to use as a base for our predictions. An ideal base for a prediction would usually be to draw on a typical experience. For example, if you want to imagine your next dental appointment, the most useful memory would be a standard check-up, not the one time that you had your tooth yanked out and fainted. But traumatic memories tend to come to our minds more quickly. Psychologists call this availability bias: we tend to use the most emotionally intense, vivid and extreme emotions to imagine the future, even if they’re the least representative because they are the first ones to come to mind. In Gatsby’s obsession with Daisy, he mainly built his vision of the future off of a single, emotionally-packed moment with Daisy rather than a holistic view of their past. 
Projection Bias
This is when we assume that our future selves will be the same and feel the same way as we do now. Gatsby spent five years dreaming about Daisy with his original romantic obsession, but he failed to realize that people change. When the moment of their reunion finally arrived, he expected her to finally feel the way that he had felt, but she didn’t.
“‘Can’t repeat the past?’ He cried incredulously. ‘Why of course you can!’”
Gatsby’s words encapsulate his denial. His refusal to move on from an emotion from five years ago, ignoring the fact that people grow, change and move on.
Affective forecasting error shows up in everyday life. When your brain convinces you that getting into your dream school will make you happy forever, or that a bad grade will ruin your future forever, it’s creating a distorted version of your future. When someone achieves their long-awaited goal and still feels unfulfilled, it can lead to feelings of disappointment, emptiness, anxiety and even depression. Affect forecasting error can prevent people from trying new things because their brain convinces them that the embarrassment of failure will be unbearable. The good news is that just knowing this concept can help prevent you from falling prey to it. We can combat this by recognizing that our emotions are much less intense and short-lived than we imagine. When you are imagining the future or thinking about how future events will make you feel, you can ask yourself questions. “Have I felt this way before and did it last as long as I expected?” “Am I focusing too much on the positive/negative aspects?” Or “Am I expecting my future self to feel and think exactly as I do now?” These small questions can help you predict events more realistically.
Gatsby’s story is an example of how our minds can deceive us. His dream, built on an imaginary future, was shaped by affective forecasting error. He believed that reaching his dream would bring lasting happiness, but like many of us today, he misjudged how he’d truly feel. We’ve internalized the beliefs that success will bring peace or that failure will ruin us. Just like Gatsby, we all stare at our own green lights across the bay: the perfect partner, job, or future, convinced that reaching it will finally make everything right. But feelings fade, life moves on and our imagination doesn’t always align with our experience. Understanding how your mind predicts emotions can help you set more realistic expectations for future feelings and focus on the present. Gatsby’s story serves as a great reminder to step back from the fantasies created by our brains and embrace the messy, unpredictable reality of life. So, what’s your green light? How far have you chased it? Take a breath and think about it. Don’t let it blind you to what’s already around you. If you’ve experienced your own “Gatsby moment”, you’re not alone. Share your story below.


