    As we grow, we begin forming our own  thoughts and opinions. Some of us, however, are lost in conclusions while others explore different perspectives, and often, we end up following peer pressure and become easily influenced. This could be a symptom of identity diffusion, a psychological theory that we will explore through the lens of “it” girl Serena van der Woodsen in the popular teen drama series “Gossip Girl.”
    Set in New York City’s Upper East Side, the series follows the lives of wealthy high school students who are being exposed by an anonymous blogger called Gossip Girl. The story emerges with Serena and her unexpected return to the city, bringing up old rivalries and secrets. As her friends, Blair Waldorf, Nate Archibald,Chuck Bass and “lonely boy” outsider Dan Humphrey get caught in the drama, relationships, betrayals and scandals unfold. 
    Identity diffusion, in the context of Erik Erikson’s theory of psychosocial development and James Marcia’s identity statuses, refers to a stage where an individual has not explored potential identities and made commitments yet. It’s characterized by a lack of self-clarity—individuals in this stage may feel aimless with a fragmented sense of self, easily influenced and struggling with healthy relationships.
    In “Gossip Girl”, Serena’s identity is usually characterized as “carefree” and “rebellious,”which clashes with her Upper East Side upbringing and the myriad expectations placed upon her. This internal conflict has led to a constant search for identity in her relationships, experiences and external validation. For example, when with Dan, she was the down-to-earth “nice rich girl” who doesn’t seem to care about status and downplays her privilege. However, when Blair is around, she is often more passive and apologetic, trying to avoid conflict with Blair over attention, power and relationships. With her family, especially her mother Lily, she tries to be the “good daughter” since her mother expects her to uphold a certain social image, although she ends up rebelling or feeling frustrated. And lastly to Gossip Girl, she is portrayed as the glamorous, reckless and mysterious everyone loves and wants to become, leading her to struggle with the pressure of that public image and often either rebel against it or lean to it. Therefore, her personality and choices are often inconsistent and unpredictable, and her inability to define her true self contributes to her chaotic relationships, shifting personalities and ongoing search for identity throughout the series.
    Individuals experiencing identity diffusion may struggle to find their place in society. Not only can this make it difficult to form and maintain healthy relationships, it can also lead to inconsistency in actions, lack of direction and difficulty making secure decisions. It can also lead to feelings of emptiness, low self-esteem and difficulty regulating emotions, potentially contributing to mental health issues.    In conclusion, Gossip Girl has well portrayed the depiction of Serena’s struggle with self identity due to her low self esteem and society’s expectations of her. If you’ve experienced similar emotions or would like to discuss the topic further, leave a comment below.
    Remember to always sympathize with others who are struggling with their self identity as you can never truly know what they may be going through.
