 As we age, we often long for a closer bond with our parents and romanticize such relationships in the media. However, not all are healthy, and flaws are often overlooked. One example is parentification—when a child becomes the caregiver instead of receiving support. This dynamic is evident in the beloved fast-talking mother and daughter duo, Lorelai and Rory of Gilmore Girls.

    Throughout the 7 seasons of Gilmore Girls, we follow Rory and Lorelai go through different stages of their life - Rory as a high school student to a college student and Lorelai as a single working mother. Since Lorelai had Rory at a very young age of 16 and was also going through a rough patch after running away from her parents, she had formed a close bond with her daughter and they would talk about everything to each other - from books and movies to boys and personal problems. Lorelai has always turned to Rory for emotional support, but as the show goes on, we can see how unhealthy their relationship has slowly become and how it has affected adult Rory in the later seasons.

    Parentification occurs when a child takes on parental roles, often due to the parent’s emotional immaturity or absence. Parents often seek emotional and/or practical support from their child more than the other way around. This type of trauma can lead to significant psychological distress and can be considered as a form of emotional abuse. As children carry this emotional burden with them, this might lead them to struggle with anxiety, depression, chronic stress, setting boundaries and managing adult problems. Instead of learning to express and regulate their own emotions, these children have to prioritise managing their parents’ emotions first and have an inability to process feelings in a healthy way. Because they are so focused on others’ feelings, they may struggle to recognise and name their own emotions. This may cause them a stunted emotional and psychological growth.

    In Gilmore Girls, boundaries between Rory and Lorelai’s relationship aren’t often clearly defined. Especially in the early seasons, Rory would have to take on the parental role instead of Lorelai. One such example is during Rory’s first day at Chilton. Lorelai overslept and realised they were running late while Rory was ready and waiting for her. When she realised all her good clothes were in the dry cleaners, she carelessly threw on a casual and humiliating outfit which was inappropriate for formal occasions like visiting the headmaster’s office in a school. Rory was the one who had to play the parental role and chastise her mother, saying things like, “Do you know what happens to people when they’re late on their first day?”, which is something you’ll probably hear your mother say when you’re running late for school — or something in the lines of that. In the later seasons, we can see Rory’s emotional growth regressing as a way of reclaiming her child years after having to act like the parent for so long and slowly starts having an emotional intelligence of a child from her actions like sleeping with a married man, cheating on her boyfriends and stealing someone’s boat just because she wasn’t happy. This stunted emotional growth can also be shown in Gilmore Girls: A Year In The Life, where Rory still does some of the actions stated above.

    Parentification can be shown more often in the real world than many of us expected. A child being expected to comfort their parents or think that they have to solve their parents’ problems due to being constantly told about their problems is just one of the examples of parentification. There are also other examples of parentification when a child has to take on adult responsibilities like caring for younger siblings or ill parents, managing household duties, providing financial support, etc. While many people think of it as a good thing and often praise the child as responsible, sensible and filial, they often fail to realise that most of them do yearn for a normal childhood and would often regress in adulthood emotionally to feel childlike again, peaking in their teenage years.

    In conclusion, Gilmore Girls has clearly shown the unhealthy signs of parentification in Lorelai and Rory’s relationship. Their relationship, while often adored by many people, there will always be some scenes which will make us feel uncomfortable. If you have experienced similar relationships with your parents or felt this way and would like to discuss this further, leave a comment below. Remember to be kind and learn to sympathize with children experiencing parentification and try to understand their behaviour and thoughts better.