    As we start growing, we start having our own thoughts and opinions about many different things. Some of us, however, still feel lost while others are exploring different ideas and perspectives, and often end up being easily influenced by others as such. This could be a symptom of identity diffusion, a psychological theory that we will explore through the it girl Serena van der Woodsen from the popular teen drama TV series Gossip Girl.
    Set in New York City’s Upper East Side, the series follows the lives of wealthy and privileged students being exposed by a famous anonymous blogger called Gossip Girl. The story begins with Serena van der Woodsen, the glamourous “it girl” and her unexpected return to the city, bringing up old rivalries and secrets. As her friends, Blair Waldorf, Nate Archibald and Chuck Bass and “lonely boy” outsider Dan Humphrey get caught in the drama, relationships, betrayals and scandals unfold. 
    Identity diffusion, in the context of Erik Erikson’s theory of psychosocial development and James Marcia’s identity statuses, refers to a stage where an individual has not explored potential identities and made commitments yet. It’s characterised by a lack of clarity, a sense of confusion and a lack of direction in one’s life. Individuals in this stage may feel aimless with a fragmented sense of self, easily influenced and struggle with meaningful and healthy relationships.
    In Gossip Girl, Serena’s identity is usually characterised as “carefree” and “rebellious”, which clashes with her Upper East Side upbringing and the expectations placed upon her. This internal conflict has led to a constant search for identity through her relationships, experiences and external validation since she learnt to be whoever others wanted her to be instead of becoming herself. For example, when she is with Dan, she is the down-to-earth “nice rich girl” who doesn’t seem to care about status and downplays her privilege. However, when Blair is around, she is often more passive and apologetic and tries avoiding conflict with Blair over attention, power and relationships. With her family, especially her mother Lily, she tries to be the “good daughter” since her mother expects her to uphold a certain social image, although she ends up rebelling or feeling frustrated. And lastly to Gossip Girl, she is portrayed as the glamorous, reckless and mysterious “it girl” everyone loves and wants to become, leading her to struggle with the pressure of that public image and often either rebel against it or lean to it. Therefore, her personality and choices are often inconsistent and unpredictable, and her inability to define her true self contributes to her chaotic relationships, shifting personalities and ongoing search for identity throughout the series.
    Individuals experiencing identity diffusion may struggle to define themselves, understand their place in the world, and distinguish their identity from others. Not only can this make it difficult to form and maintain healthy relationships, it can also lead to inconsistency in actions, lack of direction and difficulty making decisions and achieving goals. It can also lead to feelings of emptiness, low self-esteem and difficulty regulating emotions, potentially contributing to mental health issues like depression and anxiety in a person.
    In conclusion, Gossip Girl has well portrayed the depiction of Serena’s struggle with self identity due to her low self esteem and society’s expectations of her. If you’ve experienced similar emotions or would like to discuss the topic further, leave a comment below.
    Remember to always sympathise with and be kind to people who are struggling with their self identity as you can never truly know what they may be going through.

