Psychology behind: Dead Poets Society.

The film “Dead Poets Society” is set in 1959 at Welton Academy, a conservative, all boys preparatory school. We are introduced to the main character of the film, Neil Perry, who, throughout the story, fights for his passions and his freedom from the constraints of authority.

Looking at the movie from a psychological lens, we delve deep into the Freudian theory of the conscious and unconscious mind, the ID, ego, and superego playing a major role in the characters’ actions throughout the film. Sigmund Freud’s theory presents the idea that a large part of our emotions, thoughts, and feelings, operate outside of our conscious awareness. Our unconscious mind influences our behaviour greatly. This theory is presented repetitively in the movie. Studying at a prestigious and conservative school such as Welton Academy, the group of boys have suppressed desires and limited freedom. The conscious mind allows the characters to be influenced by conformity, societal expectations, and a desire for success. The conscious mind is directly interlinked with the superego. The superego is, in simple terms, a moral compass, representing societal rules and values. For example, Neil’s father, Thomas Perry, has planned out Neil’s whole future for him. He will go to military school, go to Harvard, and he will become a doctor. Neil’s own passions and desires are out of the question. This plan, set by Thomas, is influenced by the superego, the societal expectations and standards. 

However, the unconscious mind on the other hand, represents the true feelings and desires of the boys in the academy. It represents passion and rebellion. Neil’s fate at the end of the film is a prime example of the unconscious mind influencing his behaviour. His inability to reconcile his passion for acting with his father’s expectations is a conflict that deeply disturbs the unconscious mind. His inability to gain autonomy leads to his self inflicted death, a result of the unconscious mind and his suppressed desires.

Mr. Perry's plan for Neil to go to military school and then Harvard to become a doctor, is a major example of projection. Throughout the movie, we hear Mr. Perry talk about how he never got such opportunities when he was younger, so Neil must take advantage of the opportunities presented to him, setting his own interests aside. This provides evidence as to how damaging authoritative parenting can be. 

Moving on to one of the other main characters in the film, Todd Anderson. He is portrayed as a timid and quiet boy, whose main feature is his shyness. However, his personality goes beyond his shyness and quietness. Todd perfectly represents social anxiety disorder and avoidant personality disorder. His anxiety is especially notable when he is shown to be afraid of presenting his poem in class, as well as his refusal to participate in the dead poets society. Freud’s theory is also fitting for his character. Todd’s personality faces a clash between superego and id. His personality is controlled and submissive, a result of the superego, until the end of the film when he rebels against the headmaster, which shows the ID, the unconscious, primal desires. Throughout the film, we also see Todd’s character develop further. At the start, he was a quiet young boy with the need to fulfill his family’s expectations and become like his brother. But by the end of the film, we see his identity formation through the expression of poetry and language, growing his own voice by the end of the film. 

Moving on to other characters of the film, John Keating is the mentor that allows the students to find their own voices in a world where free thinking is constricted. Mr Keating presents his unorthodox teachings which do not fit the traditional and conservative values of the school, and as a result, he is looked down upon by other teachers and the headmaster. He praises freedom of thought and speech, critical thinking, and especially emphasises on the dangers of conformity. One of the major themes of the film is the conflict between conformity and individuality. He teaches the students about societal pressure, the importance of individuality, and the power of creative and critical thinking to overcome personal limitations. Through Keating’s unconventional classes, he teaches the students how to express themselves in their own unique ways. Keating’s classes and the rebelling boys also allow us to analyze the effect of obedience on all the students at Welton Academy. Milgram’s study of obedience showed how individuals would perform destructive acts under an authority figure. The film highlights how dangerous it can be to blindly follow authority. Milgram's study on obedience is also reflected in Neil’s behaviour at the end of the film. He silently accepts his father's decisions, bottling all his feelings up, leading to his suicide. 

The four pillars of Welton Academy are tradition, honor, discipline, and excellence. These are the rigid and conformist values that the school instills onto their students, stifling critical thinking and individuality. These pillars lead to introjection among students. Introjection is the unconscious process when individuals take in external ideas, beliefs, and attitudes, making it a part of their own psyche. Pushing these extremists values onto the students will lead to the turning of self. This is when behaviours that are remotely different from the preached values in Welton Academy, will be looked down upon, and students will feel a sense of guilt for straying away from “their” beliefs. 

The film also focuses on identity and masculinity among the group of boys. Keating and the boys challenge traditional masculinity and gender roles, encouraging students to express themselves with authenticity. In this way, Keating encourages students to find their “barbaric yawp,” a way to freely express themselves and find their unique voice which is core to their identity and masculinity. Erik Erikson’s Psychosocial theory shows how identity and role confusion impact the characters in the film. According to Erikson, adolescents must face the critical task of discovering their personal identity. If they fail to do so, they fall into what is called, “role confusion,” which is a state of uncertainty in regards to an individual’s social roles and their identity. Todd Anderson is a prime example, living in the shadows of his brother, he shows low self worth. Under Keating’s guidance, he explores his own voice and selfhood, a symbol of identity. 

This film presents various psychological concepts, such as conformity, projection and the conscious and unconscious minds of the students, in a way that encourages us to find our own voice amidst the constant societal pressures placed on us. The ending of the film shows how collective resistance and rebellion against authoritative structures can make a difference. It serves as a reminder to pursue your passions bravely and find your own voice. 
