“As Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams he found himself transformed in his
bed into an enormous insect.
”
– The Metamorphosis
Gregor Samsa, the protagonist of the novella by Franz Kafka, is one who went through a jarring 
transformation. If we look at this character through a psychological lens, it’s revealed that his transformation delved into depersonalization disorder.As per the book, Gregor Samsa was the sole breadwinner of his family of three which consists of
his father, mother and younger sister. He worked as a travelling salesperson, withno friends or acquaintances— fueling societal isolation. One morning he woke up and realised he had transformed into an enormous insect. He tried to
shout but he couldn't speak in human language any more. He couldn't move because he was
lying on his back. He somehow moved out of the bed and tried to open the door but couldn't. He
was helpless due to his transformation. Throughout the novella we can see several instances
where Gregor is mistreated or misunderstood by his family.
Depersonalization disorder is a mental health condition where you feel disconnected from your
body, your feelings and your environment. It tends to come and go over a long period of time
and causes distress and anxiety. It affects your ability to recognize your thoughts, feelings and
body as your own. It affects your ability to see your surroundings accurately, without losing touch with reality. You understand that your perceptions aren’t real, which can be frustrating and
cause anxiety.
Many people have a passing experience of depersonalization or derealization at some point.
But when these feelings keep occurring or never fully go away, they make it hard for you to
function. This condition is more common in people who experience trauma, such as violence,
abuse or other kinds of extreme stress. Depersonalization or derealization occurs on its own
(that is, it is not caused by drugs or another mental health disorder), and it persists or recurs.
The symptoms are very distressing to the person or make it difficult for the person to function at
home or at work.
Gregor’s physical transformation can be seen as a manifestation of this—a
dissociative experience where an individual feels disconnected from their body or sense of self.
In psychological terms, Gregor’s transformation into an insect may represent an extreme form of
alienation, where he no longer feels connected to his human self. His dehumanization is a direct
reflection of his increasing isolation, not only physically but emotionally from those around him,
particularly his family.Depersonalization symptoms include feelings that you're seeing your thoughts, feelings, or body
or parts of your body from the outside. You might also feel that people and your surroundings
are not real, like you're living in a movie or a dream.Another symptom is the emotional or physical numbness of your senses or responses to the
world around you. You might feel emotionally disconnected from people you care about, as if
you were separated by a glass wall. After the harsh treatment and isolation from his family
members, Gregor became numb due
to the harsh rejection met by his family.
Depersonalization is often linked to intense stress or trauma, like Physical abuse, Domestic
violence (witnessing or experiencing it), Accidents or natural disasters, Life-threatening danger,
sudden death of a loved one, or a parent with severe mental illness. It is not triggered through
medication, alcohol, drugs or any other substances.
If you or anyone you know is going through this, there is no need to be afraid. You can get help
for yourself and others. When choosing to get help, always count on a licensed medical
practitioner. When considering treatment options, your provider will talk with you about your
medical history, your symptoms and treatment goals. They may recommend medication and talk
therapy. You’ll likely need several visits initially, and then regular follow-ups with a psychologist
and occasional follow-ups with a psychiatrist. Your psychiatrist will help to find the right
treatment for your specific situation and ensure that the side effects are manageable. Your
psychologist will use talk therapy to teach you skills to cope with your symptoms and gain
insight into your symptom triggers.
In conclusion,
“The Metamorphosis” by Franz Kafka showcases Gregor’s transformation as a
powerful metaphor for depersonalization disorder. Through Gregor’s journey we see that many
factors contributed to transformation. The extreme stress is was under in due to his job and the
debts by his parents, mental abuse by his boss,
familial and societal dehumanization and alienation which was the final straw in his life. Gregor’s
character helps us to understand the complexity of mental health and that sometimes it's not
one thing.
Sometimes we forget to ask our friends and family how they are truly feeling. If you have experienced similar situations or want to express your thoughts about the article, the comment session is always open. There is no need to hesitate as we would like to hear your thoughts.
