Psychology behind: Black Swan

The film revolves around Nina Sayers, a dedicated ballerina radiating femininity and dedication in the field of ballet. Her passion for ballet rules every single facet of her life. 

So when her company decides to replace their old ballerina for their opening production of “Swan Lake,” Nina is the first choice. This film particularly delves deep into the dark side of perfectionism and obsession. Nina spends every waking second practicing, working on ways to improve, to be perfect. She also exhibits self harm tendencies throughout the film, going through severe lengths to reach perfection. 

We are also introduced to two other significant characters in the film; Thomas Leroy and Lily. Here, we are introduced to Carl Jung’s archetypes. What is an archetype? It is an original concept that precedes and forms the structure of physical manifestations. It is a set of symbols representing aspects of the human psyche derived from collective human experience. There are four different archetypes; the self, the anima/animus, the persona, and the shadow. Jung’s four archetypes are used in the film to emphasise Nina’s internal conflict and her psychological transformation throughout the film.

The self refers to a unified whole of consciousness and unconsciousness of an individual. The anima is the feminine archetype, and the animus is the masculine archetype, this represents the unconscious opposite sex images that shape our interactions with the opposite sex. The shadow highlights our unconscious aspects of our personality, such as hidden desires, weaknesses, and instincts.  In the film, Nina portrays the white swan perfectly, a symbol of innocence and purity, while her rival, Lily, portrays the black swan just as perfectly, symbolising seduction, sensuality, and spontaneity. The two characters are a contrast of each other, with Lily representing the shadow.
With this competition, Nina has to strive hard to be able to perform both, the white and black swan. 
The shadow also represents Nina’s repressed desires and her dark impulses, which she projects onto Lily. However, Nina is confronted by her shadow in small, subtle ways, be it through stealing Beth, the previous famous actor’s lipstick, or through constantly scratching her shoulders, which reveals self harm tendencies and aggression unveiling another layer of the shadow archetype. 

The persona archetype is a social mask that we use to interact with others. This is present in the film through the way that Nina presents herself, a pure and graceful ballerina. This desperate presentation of a perfect and elegant ballerina reveals another complex layer of a struggling mother-daughter relationship. Her submissiveness and obedience, and her people pleasing tendencies and obsession with perfection makes much more sense when we understand that this is a substitute for her mother’s failed ballet career. Her mother is projecting her own desires onto Nina. Even in Nina's room, it portrays the infantilization that her mother has forced upon her. Soft, feminine, and childish, not just through the bedroom, but also through controlling her diet and sexuality. This can be seen when Erica, her mother, prepares Nina’s food for her, bringing it to her room. Furthermore, when Erica finds out about the abrasions on Nina’s back, she strips Nina down to her underwear, forcing her to cut her nails. At home, we watch Nina obsessively lace and re-lace her shoes, as if she's performing, even at home. This exhibits signs of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). The unhealthy familial dynamics between her mother leads to a spiral down anxiety, hallucinations, eating disorders, and self harm. 

The film also presents the role of duality through Nina’s character. It shows this through the duality of self, with Nina’s conflicting desire for perfection, and her repressed desires for freedom and passion.

Thomas Leroy also plays a significant role in the film. He acts as the Animus. By seducing her, and then rejecting her, he urges Nina to find her own sensuality, and become the black swan. He issues a challenge for her to find her darker self to make the black swan come alive. Nina’s relationship with Thomas slowly becomes more and more detailed as the film progresses, with Thomas pushing her physical boundaries, and convincing Nina that there's no other way to get the performance he desires but to sexually humiliate her. Nina develops Stockholm syndrome, idealising Thomas, willing to do anything to get the role. 

As the film progresses, Nina and Lily slowly get closer when Lily invites her for a night out. Tempted to let loose from her mother, as well as Leroy’s insistence that she “touch herself” in order to loosen up, she lets Lily slip a disinhibiting drug in her cocktail, and afterwards, the two end up having passionate sex. The sex scene highlights Nina’s repressed desires and passions that had been hidden away, suppressed for the sake of perfectionism. 

With her immense passion unleashed, she gets the role of the black swan. However, this begins to take a toll on her, as she faces more and more pressure, and towards the end of the film, she becomes more aggressive with her mother, as if unleashing her shadow archetype. With the liberation of the shadow, she begins to experience hallucinations frequently, especially by the end of the film. In a fit of rage and passion, she takes a shard of glass, killing her rival, Lily, or something she believes she did. Right after that, she performs the main role as the black swan. This hints to Nina dealing with hallucinations, possibly being a result of schizophrenia or psychosis. However, it is claimed that Nina did not have schizophrenia, but rather, she had psychosis. This is because Nina lacked the persistent symptoms of schizophrenia. She did not have persistent delusions and hallucinations, but instead, she had episodes which spanned through the movie. Nina begins to believe that she is transforming into the black swan. Her relationship with her obsessive mother could have played a role in developmental issues, leading to psychosis. The major factor of this spiralling loophole of mental illnesses is the stress and pressure to get the role of the black swan. 

The film incredibly captures the destruction of perfectionism. The drive to succeed led to the death of the self, and the death of innocence. 


